**Liver cirrhosis**

Steven Scott Harwell was a famous American musician. He died of liver
failure at the age of 56 years. There are several such cases. The
failure usually happens because of liver cirrhosis which is scarring of
liver tissue and nodules.

This scarring, or fibrosis, is caused by chronic liver injury from
various conditions like non-alcoholic fatty liver disease, excessive
alcohol consumption, or hepatitis.

The literal meaning of \"cirrhosis\" is scarring of the liver. The term
originates from the Greek word \"kirrhos,\" meaning \"yellowish,\"
referring to the appearance of the diseased liver.

**Globally, cirrhosis caused over 1.47 million deaths in 2019,constituting 2.6% of all deaths worldwide.**

![Cirrhosis: Severe Liver
Scarring](/images/liveryy.jpg)

**fatty liver disease (FLD**), is a common liver condition, especially
in people who are overweight or obese, and it\'s becoming increasingly
prevalent globally. 

FLD, occurs when excessive fat accumulates in the liver. 

**FLD** can be caused by various factors, including obesity, type 2
diabetes, high cholesterol, high blood pressure, and metabolic
syndrome. It can also be linked to excessive alcohol consumption. 

![What Causes
Cirrhosis?](/images/liver2.jpg)

In some cases, FLD can progress to a more severe condition called
**non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH)**, which is characterized by
inflammation and damage to the liver. 

If NASH progresses, it can lead to **liver scarring (fibrosis),** and
eventually, **cirrhosis.**

**Cirrhosis** is a permanent condition, characterized by widespread
scarring and nodules that disrupt the liver\'s structure and function. 

Cirrhosis can lead to various complications, including liver failure,
portal hypertension (high blood pressure in the portal vein), and an
increased risk of **liver cancer.**

- the global prevalence of **non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD)**
  is about 30.2%. 

- Latin America has the highest NAFLD prevalence at 44.37%. Middle East
  and North Africa (MENA) follows with a prevalence of 36.53%. 

- On the other hand, Japan has a relatively low NAFLD prevalence
  compared to other regions, potentially linked to lower obesity rates. 

- The global prevalence of **alcohol-related liver disease (ARLD)** is
  estimated at 4.8%, with variations across regions and countries, and
  higher in males than females. 

- Europe has the highest prevalence, with countries like **Italy,
  Sweden, and the UK showing higher rates** compared to others. The
  rates are Italy: 16.1%, Sweden: 14.0%, UK: 7.2%

**Prevention of alcoholic liver disease**

The only way to prevent alcoholic liver disease, including cirrhosis is
to restrict alcohol consumption.

The ideal solution will be to not drink any alcohol at all (even a low
consumption of alcohol can cause cancers as per WHO, 2023).

If that is not possible, the consumption should be less than
two [<u>drinks</u>](https://www.cdc.gov/alcohol/standard-drink-sizes/index.html#cdc_generic_section_2-standard-alcohol-drink-sizes) or
less in a day for men and
one [<u>drink</u>](https://www.cdc.gov/alcohol/standard-drink-sizes/index.html#cdc_generic_section_2-standard-alcohol-drink-sizes) or
less in a day for women.

**Prevention of non-alcoholic liver disease**

To prevent non-alcoholic fatty liver disease, you need to control weight
and should reduce lipid levels in the blood. Please refer the obesity
chapter.

**Hepatitis**

Hepatitis is inflammation of the liver, often caused by viral infections
(A, B, C, D, E), but can also be caused by autoimmune conditions,
alcohol, drugs, or other factors. 

**Causes:**

Hepatitis can be caused Viral infections (hepatitis A, B, C, D, and E),
Autoimmune disorders, Alcohol consumption, certain medications etc. 

- **Hepatitis A**: A common, usually mild, acute viral infection spread
  through contaminated food or water. 

- **Hepatitis B**: A serious infection that can be acute or chronic,
  spread through contact with infected blood or body fluids. 

- **Hepatitis C:** A chronic infection that can lead to liver damage,
  spread through contact with infected blood. 

- **Hepatitis D:** A rare infection that only occurs in people who are
  also infected with hepatitis B. 

- **Hepatitis E:** An acute infection spread through contaminated water,
  primarily in developing countries. 

- **Autoimmune Hepatitis**: A chronic condition where the body\'s immune
  system attacks the liver. 

- **Alcoholic Hepatitis**: Liver inflammation caused by excessive
  alcohol consumption. 

- **Drug-induced Hepatitis**: Liver inflammation caused by certain
  medications. 

**Prevention of hepatitis**

Avoid alcohol consumption for alcohol induced hepatitis.

**Hepatitis A and E Prevention:**

Hygiene is important since these two infections spread by contaminated
food and water.

Practice good hygiene, including frequent handwashing with soap and
water, especially before meals and after using the restroom. 

Ensure safe food and water consumption, especially when traveling to
areas with poor sanitation. 

Avoid contact with contaminated objects or bodily fluids, especially
stool. 

**Hepatitis B and C Prevention:**

Practice safe sex, including using condoms, to prevent transmission of
the virus. 

Avoid sharing personal items like razors, toothbrushes, or needles,
syringes, or other drug equipment which can carry the virus. 

Ensure new, sterile needles are used for tattoos and piercings. 

Avoid contact with contaminated blood or bodily fluids. 

**Hepatitis D prevention:**

Prevented by avoiding hepatitis B infection, as hepatitis D only infects
those with hepatitis B.

**Vaccination:**

The **Hepatitis A** **vaccine** is an effective option, especially for
children, travellers to certain countries, and those at high risk. 

The **hepatitis B vaccine** is also safe and effective, and is
recommended for almost everyone. 
